Getting Started
###############

Installation
------------
Use the ``pip`` tool to download ``pyHRV`` from the `Python Package Index (PyPi)
<https://pypi.org>`_. If you are using macOS or a Linux-based operating system, open the *Terminal* and type in the
command below. Windows users may use the *Command Prompt*.

.. code:: bash

   $ pip install pyhrv


``pyHRV`` depends on the following third-party packages, which will be automatically installed using the pip tool, if
these are not already on your machine:

* `biosppy <https://github.com/PIA-Group/BioSPPy>`_
* `numpy <http://www.numpy.org>`_
* `scipy <http://scipy.org>`_
* `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org>`_
* `nolds <https://github.com/CSchoel/nolds>`_
* `spectrum <https://github.com/withspectrum/spectrum>`_

.. note::

   This has been primarily developed for the Python 2.7 programming language. Running the pip command above may cause
   errors when trying to install the package using Python 3.

   In this case, try to install the pyHRV dependencies first:

   .. code:: bash

       $ pip install biosppy
       $ pip install matplotlib
       $ pip install numpy
       $ pip install scipy
       $ pip install nolds
       $ pip install spectrum

.. note::

   Alternatively, it is recommended to install the `Anaconda <https://www.anaconda.com>`_ software, which
   comes with a compatible Python 2.7 distribution and all the necessary (and more) third-party packages for scientific computing.


R-Peak Detection with BioSPPy
-----------------------------
``BioSPPy`` is a toolbox for biosignal processing, and comes with built-in ECG processing and R-peak detection
algorithms. These can be used to compute the NNI series upon which the HRV parameters can be computed.

An example of this procedure is demonstrated below, using ECG data acquired with the `BITalino (r)evolution <www
.bitalino.com>`_ hardware and the `OpenSignals (r)evolution <http://bitalino.com/en/software>`_ software. The ECG
signals are imported and converted to mV using the `opensignalsreader <https://github
.com/PGomes92/opensignalsreader>`_ package.

.. code:: python

      import biosppy
      import numpy as np
      import pyhrv.tools as tools
      from opensignalsreader import OpenSignalsReader

      # Load sample ECG signal & extract R-peaks using BioSppy
      signal = OpenSignalsReader('./samples/SampleECG.txt').signal('ECG')
      signal, rpeaks = biosppy.signals.ecg.ecg(signal, show=False)[1:3]

      # Compute NNI
      nni = tools.nn_intervals(rpeaks)

.. note::

   ``pyHRV`` can of course be used with any ECG - or ECG Lead I like - signal and is not limited to signals acquired with specific devices or software. The instructions above are merely an example.

.. _ref-samples:

Sample NNI Series
-----------------
`pyHRV` comes with sample data available `here <https://github.com/PGomes92/pyhrv/tree/master/pyhrv/files>`_ folder.

.. _ref-returntuple:

The biosppy.utils.ReturnTuple Object
-------------------------------------
The results of the ``pyHRV`` parameter functions, wrapped and returned as ``biosppy.utils.ReturnTuple`` objects. This package-specific class combines the advantages of Python dictionaries (indexing using keywords) and Python tuples (immutable). Parameter values stored in the ``ReturnTuple`` object can be accessed as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   from biosppy import utils

   # Store sample data in a ReturnTuple object
   args = (500, 600, )
   names = ('parameter1', 'parameter2', )
   results = utils.ReturnTuple(args, names)

   # Get and print 'parameter1'
   print(results['parameter1'])

.. seealso::

   - `BioSPPy API Reference - ReturnTuple <https://biosppy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/biosppy.html#biosppy.utils.ReturnTuple>`_
   - `Note on ReturnTuple objects <https://biosppy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial.html#a-note-on-return-objects>`_

.. _ref-matplotlib-workaround:

What may help when matplotlib blocks your code from being executed
------------------------------------------------------------------

The plots generated by the functions of ``pyHRV`` use ``matplotlib`` as the fundamental plotting library. The default backend configuration of this library can cause some unwanted behaviour, where your Python scripts are interrupted whenever a plot is shown.

.. important::

   This issue can be solved by switching the ``matplotlib`` backend to a backend that supports the ``matplotlib
   .interactive()`` mode. This mode allows you to show the generated plots without interrupting your Python script. The
   ``Qt4Agg`` has shown to be a suitable backend to solve this issue on Windows and macOS.

   Add the following lines of code **at the top of your script, before importing the other Python packages** to try
   to solve this issue:

   .. code-block:: python

      # Import matplotlib and set the 'Qt4Agg' backend to support interactive mode on Windows and macOS
      import matplotlib
      matplotlib.use('Qt4Agg')

      # Activate interactive mode
      import matploltib.pyplot as plt
      plt.ion()